Every seminar is different, in the same way that the circles of Hell are different. But they share some of the same unfortunate qualities, too. After you’ve stolen the requisite bagel, watch for the following to happen in your next departmental seminar: The speaker will read a wordy slide verbatim, thus defeating the purpose of a talk. Something won’t transfer from Mac to PC. The faculty member who once glared at you for falling asleep will fall asleep. A poor, misguided student will actually take notes. The projector will malfunction, and a room full of PhD’s will be unable to fix it. The speaker will explain abbreviations and acronyms more quickly than can be realistically remembered, leading no one in the room to marvel when he concludes, “And it turned out the answer was a combination of DMSO and PLM4!” A slide will include unnecessary animation, and results will spiral or bounce into place while the speaker grins and everyone under thirty rolls their eyes. You will become painfully aware that it’s a beautiful day outside. You will doodle. It will be pretty. You will start writing a list of things you need to accomplish as soon as they let you out of this freaking room. The speaker will spend ten minutes thanking people no one in the room has heard of. If the speaker has a laser pointer, he will laser-point to items to which lasers needn’t point. The speaker will make statements clearly designed to demonstrate that he is smarter than you. He will alternate this practice with long, laborious explanations of something all attendees know already. Spittle will be visible. The student who asks every speaker a question … will ask the speaker a question. The slideshow will advance too far by accident, and the speaker will need help finding the “back” button. If the speaker uses actual transparencies or gives an old-school “chalk talk,” he will act all superior about it. The final slide will include a cute cartoon. Too little, too late. Fifteen minutes past the scheduled end time, there will be no end in sight. Is nothing sacred?


If you change the angle of the missile’s trajectory just a couple of inches, you won’t notice the difference—but millions of miles away, the discrepancy will be amplified, and you’ll miss the moon entirely.


