Buddha explained language and meaning to Mahamati Bodhisattva: Mahamati, fools say things like this, “Meaning accords with words. Words and meaning are not separate, because meaning has no existence of its own. There is no meaning outside of words.” Mahamati, these benighted people do not know the nature of words. They do not know that words come and go, while meaning does not come and go. Mahamati, words are subject to birth and death. Meaning is not, because it transcends existence and non-existence and is not subject to birth and death and is not an entity. Mahamati, the buddhas do not teach dharmas that are subject to birth or death. Because the existence or non-existence of language is indeterminate, they do not depend upon language but transcend it. Mahamati, if someone says a buddha’s teaching is dependent on language, they are mistaken. Such a teaching transcends language. Therefore, Mahamati, neither I nor any other buddha or bodhisattva utters a single word. And why not? Because everything we teach transcends language. We never fail to teach what accords with meaning, but we do so in accordance with the discriminations of beings. Mahamati, if we did not speak, our teaching would come to an end. And if our teaching came to an end, there would be no buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-buddhas, or shravakas. And if there were none, who would teach and who would listen?


Buddha explained language and meaning to Mahamati Bodhisattva: Mahamati, fools say things like this, “Meaning accords with words. Words and meaning are not separate, because meaning has no existence of its own. There is no meaning outside of words.” Mahamati, these benighted people do not know the nature of words. They do not know that words come and go, while meaning does not come and go. Mahamati, words are subject to birth and death. Meaning is not, because it transcends existence and non-existence and is not subject to birth and death and is not an entity. Mahamati, the buddhas do not teach dharmas that are subject to birth or death. Because the existence or non-existence of language is indeterminate, they do not depend upon language but transcend it. Mahamati, if someone says a buddha’s teaching is dependent on language, they are mistaken. Such a teaching transcends language. Therefore, Mahamati, neither I nor any other buddha or bodhisattva utters a single word. And why not? Because everything we teach transcends language. We never fail to teach what accords with meaning, but we do so in accordance with the discriminations of beings. Mahamati, if we did not speak, our teaching would come to an end. And if our teaching came to an end, there would be no buddhas, bodhisattvas, pratyeka-buddhas, or shravakas. And if there were none, who would teach and who would listen?


and death. Meaning is not, because it transcends existence and non-existence


represented the five kinds of knowledge acquired by every buddha: the knowledge of reality, the knowledge of perfect reflection, the knowledge of equanimity, the knowledge of subtle discrimination, and the knowledge of what works.


The entrance was on the east side instead of the south side, toward which the Chinese preferred to orient things. This was because the Khitans worshipped the rising sun (it got cold up there in the grasslands) instead of the midday sun.


the twelfth-century Zen master Tao-ch’uan kept coming to mind: Make it out of clay or wood or silk paint it blue or green and gild it with gold but if you think a buddha looks like this the Goddess of Mercy will die from laughter.


Omitofo, which was the current Mandarin pronunciation of Amitabha. It was the standard response among Chinese Buddhists to any situation, good or bad. No sense in getting upset when something bad happens: Omitofo. And no sense in getting excited when something good happens: Omitofo. All things are made of mind: Omitofo. Including this mountain: Omitofo.


The Prajnaparamita Sutra Spoken by Manjushri (translated into English by Garma Chang in A Treasury of Mahayana Sutras) in which he tells the Buddha, Those who cultivate Prajnaparamita do not reject the dharmas (truths) of fools, nor do they grasp the dharmas of sages, because in the light of Prajnaparamita, there are no dharmas to be grasped or rejected. Moreover, those who cultivate Prajnaparamita do not delight in nirvana, nor do they detest sansara (life and death), because they do not perceive sansara, much less detest it, nor do they perceive nirvana, much less delight in it. Those who thus cultivate Prajnaparamita do not perceive any defilement to eliminate or any merit to acquire. Their minds neither expand nor contract in regard to any dharma, because they do not perceive expansion or contraction in the dharma realm. Those who can do this cultivate Prajnaparamita.


